#353   Locality-Preserving Hashing for Shifts and Cryptography

Summary of the main contributions of the paper:

The paper studies hashing for shifts in k=1 and more dimensions.
The basic idea is simple: Minhash over a radius r l1-ball. However, a naive algorithm would take time r^k for an error probability of 1/r. The goal of the paper is to reduce the time/number of queries to the data to r^(k/2).

The algorithm, based on random walks, is _very interesting_ and should have many algorithmic applications.
Unfortunately, the main ideas were already presented by the authors in a previous Crypto 2018 paper.

This paper "merely" gives a sub-optimal generalization to k=2 dimensions, and describes some applications, none of which are too surprising.

The paper also discusses a noisy version and a worst-case version of the problem.

The strongest part of the paper is the lower bound, which shows that r^(k/2) queries to the data are indeed necessary for error 1/r.
I wish they would spend more time on discussing the intuition of this part in the introduction.
The proof itself only holds for k=2, and the authors claim it can be generalized to k > 2.
I'm not sure if it is supposed to also generalize to k=1 or if that's supposed to be covered in the previous article. I looked it up, but that article seems to show the result conditional on some the hardness of discrete log, whereas the stated theorem in this paper is unconditional.


What is best about the paper:


The paper takes a very interesting algorithm from the Crypto community and bring it to the attention of the Algorithm community.
They also generalize it to the two-dimensional setting, which is probably also interesting, though not as clearly as the one-dimensional setting.


What are the paper's weaknesses:


The upper bound for the 2-dimensional setting is not tight towards the lower bound.
The authors give a simple algorithm that they conjecture to be tight, but are unfortunately unable to analyze it.

Many of the applications listed, while novel, seem to follow without many new ideas from the 2018 paper.
(At least the applications I skimmed.)


Recommendation Summary:

Weak accept. The paper makes progress on a fine line of work that will be of interest to the STOC community.
If the authors were able to prove their conjecture or tighten the lower bound, the paper would be a full accept.

